# Refusing to think

Over the summer of this year, when I was on holiday in Europe, I read the book _1984_ by George Orwell. Ashamedly, this was not the first time I had picked up this novel: a few years ago, I had begun to read it, but, being impatient and lacking the ability to focus at that time, I did not progress beyond the first page. Since then, however, I had heard it referred to a number of times, and eventualy I decided it would be worthwhile for me to have a second attempt. After all, I was well aware that it is a classic.

_1984_ is both brilliant and terrifying. Brilliant, because Orwell writes masterfully and grips you from the very beginning, convincingly laying out a hypothetical future utterly controlled by _The Party_. Terrifying, because it is not so difficult to imagine how, under certain conditions, modern society might deterioate into this totalitarian regime, and, moreover, is already in some regards in certain parts of the world. For any reader who even absorbs a fraction of the book's contents and underlying narrative, Orwell provides a great to think about seriously and in depth. Indeed, I would almost go as far as to state that the impression it left on me was one of a profound disturbance. And while there are multiple aspects of the socialist pseudo-utopia that Orwell describes, the one that resonated with me the most, and which has been troubling me ever since, is the concept of _Doublethink_.

At this stage, I would absolutely urge anyone who has not yet read _1984_ to do so, because I firmly believe it is a text which everyone should be exposed to, such is the impact that it had on me (and, I'm sure, countless others).

The rough outline of _Doublethink_ is as follows: it is the process of simultaneously holding two contradicting opinions or beliefs in one's mind, and subsequently making yourself oblivious to the fact that these are mutually exclusive. Two such examples which are prominent in _1984_ are one of _The Party_'s slogans, "WAR IS PEACE" and the statement that 2 + 2 is 5. In a nastily elegant sort of way, the practice of _Doublethink_ requires _Doublethink_: one must perform _Doublethink_ to make oneself forget about what was erased, then perform _Doublethink_ on the act of _Doublethink_, to make oneself forget that the process of active forgetting had ever occurred. This process is repeated _ad infinitum_, which oddly appealed to my mathematician's brain, as it resembles a recursive function that forever calls itself. _Doublethink_ also encapsulates other terms in the language of _1984_'s Oceania, _Newspeak_. The one which stood out to me particularly is the word _Crimestop_. This approximately entails stopping oneself from having any thought that might be considered to be a _Thoughtcrime_ (any thought which is contrary to _The Party_ and all that it represents).

After having read this book and digested in particular the role that _Doublethink_ plays in it, I started, almost with terror, to see elements of this practice of anti-thought reflected in my own life. There came the realisation that, many times, I was practicing what was in essence the same as this. To give an example, during reading a book, article or other such prose, if I came across a word, sentence or concept that I didn't understand, I would often gloss over it and trick my brain into thinking that I had understood it. It is rather ironic that I cannot remember exactly what this process was like, since, as I am writing these words, I feel like I am not fully and accurately describing it, but that is the whole point about the danger of doing this. Even more ironically, there is a part of my brain right now which is telling me to stop writing and is attempting to cloud my thought processes. It is incredibly difficult to resist. However, I know that I must proceed, since by writing these thoughts down formally, I may hopefully acknowledge the previous mistakes I have made, and remember them more clearly and accurately in the future, in order that I might succumb to this temptation less often, and possibly never one days.

Although _Doublethink_ has manifested itself in several areas of my life, I think the manifestation which is most prevalent is when I am reading a mathematical text. The level of focus and persistence required to read a mathematical publication, particularly one containing hitherto unseen and advanced content, is exceptionally high: in my opinion, higher than that required of any other text. This is because one must follow the train of logic exactly, and if link in this chain of following logic is broken, it is very difficult to understand subsequent sections of the text. To give an example, I am often guilty of reading perhaps a sentence or paragraph, and, though I may understand the basic contour of description, not really understanding the same level of detail as in the text. Instead of checking for myself any parts which are not immediately obvious, I trick myself into thinking that just reading the words, and taking them to be true without due confirmation by myself, is good enough. It is not. Firstly, because it will only reap consequences further down the line when another section of the book relies on the reader having fully appreciated the contents which are skipped over perfunctorily. In writing this piece, my sincere hope is to begin the process of ameliorating this state of my brain's sluggishness. Like any true self-development, this will not be a change which manifests itself over night, but one which requires consistent practice. Maybe tomorrow I will make myself be more aware that I am allowing myself to not think through something properly, even if I don't actually think it through on that occasion. But this breaks the chain of recursion of _Doublethink_: the process of forgetting that the obfuscating of thought occurred does not occur, and one day this will lead the very process of obfuscation not occurring at all. It is crucial that I read this regularly, in order to remind myself of the dangers of slipping back into old habits. The journey starts here and now.

TODO: most things wrong can be linked to not thinking properly (refusing to), impact of e.g. TV, link to JP's do not hide unwanted things in the fog maybe?